Theory: Asynchronous Models (#10)
apisyouwonthate/book-build-apis-2: src/1-theory/10-async.adoc

There is one issue here that the user is twiddling their thumbs for 30 seconds, but a bigger issue is that the API server is twiddling its thumbs for 30 seconds. Your API only has so many threads available to do stuff, so if you are wasting one of them sitting around for 30-60 seconds, that is a lot of other requests not being handled. More on that later.

One way to avoid the user and/or API server twiddling literal or figurative thumbs, is to have the API immediately pass that work off to a a job queue like RabbitMQ, Sidekiq, etc. This lets the API respond with a "we are working on it" response, then have the server respond with a "Yeah yeah we're working on it" response.

In HTTP this is done with a `201 Created`, or `202 Accepted` response code, which lets the client know they should look for some sort of link to get their updates.

.Letting the API do a bit less work up front, shiting the waiting work to a job queue, and letting the GUI check for updates.
[plantuml]
----
@startuml

title Message Style - Sequence Diagram

actor User
boundary "Web GUI" as GUI
control "API"
control Worker
boundary "Payment Gateway" as PG

User -> API: POST /payments
API -> Worker: Queue Job

> GUI <- API: HTTP 201 Accepted (with a URL to poll)

Reviewer: I think you want `Created` here or change it to `202`. :)

Author: Get the fuck out of here bryan, dropping by with an annoyingly correct #WellActually.

Reviewer: My bad! 🤓

Some people think that long polling is inherintly part of how some APIs (like REST) are meant to work, but there are loads of alternatives to this very primitive paradigm. For starters, Web Hooks (a.k.a Callbacks)

== Web Hooks / Callbacks

These are two pretty common names for the same thing. The idea is, a client can register a URL for an API to fire a payload at when updates happen to something they are interested in. This usually takes the form of a HTTP POST request, and is common in most APIs.

- https://api.slack.com/incoming-webhooks[Slack API > Incoming Webhooks]
- https://stripe.com/docs/webhooks[Stripe API > Webhooks]

Webhooks are great for integrating server-to-server, where an API wants to let another server (maybe an API, maybe just an application) know that something has happened. This would improve our user experience if the GUI in our example was a server-side backed application, but if it is a JavaScript application sitting in the users browser we cannot just fire stuff at their IP address and hope it works (it won't).

Callbacks do however improve the right hand side of this diagram a bit, if our payment gateway provider is using them.

> Thankfully most payment gateways do not work like this. For example, Stripe will respond with a qiuck response (this information looks fairly valid) but we will let you know if the bank approved the transaction for this card.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thankfully most payment gateways do not work like this. For example, Stripe will respond with a quick response (this information looks fairly valid) but we will let you know if the bank approved the transaction for this card.
```

Author: Thanks @cebe, ignore this until it's in review or you'll have a looooot of typo suggestions. :)

If there is anything factually incorrect, or things that look finished but dont make any sense, maybe call that out.

Reviewer 2: sure, will do. did not spot anything like that.

Author: Ready!

= Asynchronous Paradigms

So far the discussion of these paradigms has probably seemed rather similar,
they are all following a request and response structure. Getting a response from
a request is one way to do things, but there are lots of situations where a
client might expect more than one response, or a response with more information
later as more work happens on the server side.

// First, some terminology!

// **Synchronous** -
// **Asynchronous** -
// **Concurrency** -
// **Parallelagram** -

// push v pull

== Client-Server "Real-Time" Models

Let's have a quick run through of some of the common models for doing

> asynchronous stuff. Even thought you might not want to use some of these, it is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
asynchronous stuff. Even though you might not want to use some of these, it is
```

good to know what they are, even if that is only so you can recommend not doing
it when somebody else brings them up in a planning meeting.

=== Short Polling

The first approach that often gets mentioned is short polling, which is the

> client-server equivalent of a child in the backseat of the car asking "are we

Reviewer 3: Love the analogy :D

there yet? are we there yet? are we there yet?". The client is making the same
GET request to the same resource every few seconds, waiting for some sort of
change in the answer.

[quote,sp3c1,https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4642598/short-polling-vs-long-polling-for-real-time-web-applications]
----
00:00:00 C-> Is the cake ready?
00:00:01 S-> No, wait.
00:00:01 C-> Is the cake ready?
00:00:02 S-> No, wait.
00:00:02 C-> Is the cake ready?

> 00:00:03 S-> Yeah. Have some lad.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
00:00:03 S-> Yeah. Have some.
```
I think it will be more friendly towards all the audiences if you drop the lad. Doesn't add anything to this example anyway 🤷‍♀️

Author: Absolutely. This is a British thing, when I saw this I heard it in a yorkshire/midlands accent and with the guys picture next to it it all seemed to make sense. Definitely don't want to purpatrate the "everyone reading this is a man" thing though, thank you!

00:00:03 C-> Is the other cake ready? ...
----

The only benefit of short polling is that it is _very_ easy to implement. The
client can just write a while loop that makes a request, checks for a response,
then sleeps for a few seconds before making another request.

The main downside with short polling is that it's a very chatty approach, which
makes it awful to scale. The more clients you have making these requests the
more load your API has to handle, and it can grow exponentially. Conditional
network caching can help a bit here, but even then it sucks the battery life on
mobile devices.

Generally short polling is rubbish, and you should try to avoid it.

=== Long Polling

A slight tweak on the concept of short polling, long polling maintains an open
connection with the server until the answer comes in.

[quote,sp3c1,https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4642598/short-polling-vs-long-polling-for-real-time-web-applications]
----
00:00:00 C-> Is the cake ready?

> 00:00:03 S-> Yeah. Have some lad.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* some time later *
00:00:03 S-> Yeah. Have some.
```

Reviewer 3: Well after reading the next sentence I noticed the timestamps... anyhow... might make this easier to understand at a glance, but feel free to ignore me.

Reviewer 2: had the same thought initially but did not mention it, :+1:  for making this more clear.

00:00:03 C-> Is the other cake ready?
----

See here that instead of answering immediately, the server waited 3 seconds
before responding with a single update.

Generally folks recommend long polling when the client is only waiting for one
answer, so if they are ordering a single cake and it might be ready soon, then
great, let that thread focus on replying about the one cake, and when that cake

> is doing the connection is closed. If the client wants multiple status updates,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is done the connection is closed. If the client wants multiple status updates,
```

or is interested in multiple cakes, this might not be the way to go.

Personal experiences tell me this sort of blocking activity can lead to quite a
mess when you have more than a smattering of users. Blocking an entire web
thread for 3 seconds can certainly be a problem when you have a lot of clients
asking about a lot of cakes.

For example, in Rails land this is a pretty common server config:

[source,ruby]
----
workers Integer(ENV['WEB_CONCURRENCY'] || 2)
threads_count = Integer(ENV['RAILS_MAX_THREADS'] || 5)
threads threads_count, threads_count

rackup      DefaultRackup
port        ENV['PORT']     || 3000
environment ENV['RACK_ENV'] || 'development'
----

> If there was only one dyno running (a.k.a instance, pod, whatever) then 2 * 5 =

Reviewer 3: Just to play devil's advocate, `pod` doesn't really hurt in there and it might give those operating in the k8s world a better idea. You could argue "instance" is most commonly associated with AWS instances which would also count as a vendor term 🤷‍♀️ :) Chuck in a droplet there as well! 😂

> If there was only one dyno running (a.k.a instance, pod, whatever) then 2 * 5 =

Author: Yeah this is hard. I do not know what to do. Maybe I can just say "web server" lol.

10 and thats only 10 cake orders happening at the same time and you've run out of
threads for other things, like accepting payments, or registering a user.

Even having a slightly bulkier setup, with more dynos, and more processes, and more threads,

> its simply a numbers game where you are throwing more money at the situation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
it's simply a numbers game where you are just throwing more money / resources at the situation.
```

=== Web Hooks

Both these polling approaches are essentially a pull model, so lets look at a
push model: Web Hooks. Clients register a "callback URL" through a
GUI or API, and they may also specify specific types of information they are
interested in receiving. When relevant events happen on the server, it will fire
a payload at that URL, which usually takes the form of a HTTP
POST request.

.Examples of Web Hooks in popular APIs.
- https://api.slack.com/incoming-webhooks[Slack API > Incoming Webhooks]
- https://stripe.com/docs/webhooks[Stripe API > Webhooks]

A few years ago my friend and I made a website that sold silly programmer joke
t-shirts. We created the whole thing over beers, and we made some whopping

> mistakes. Our payment acceptance sequence looked like the synchronous one above, as

Reviewer 3: > looked like the synchronous one above

Not sure what you're referring to here?

Author: Ah, this used to be one flow with the diagrams mixed into the definitiuons. Then I split the definitions out first and did the diagrams afterwards as a use case. Fixed!

we didn't care about speed at that early stage. The biggest mistake was that
when the payment API gave us a positive response to the `POST` request, we
immediately considered the payment good and marked the shirts for dispatch.

It turns out there was a web hook we were meant to listen out for, and this
would confirm if the payment had been accepted, or not... Seeing as we totally
ignored that, there were a few t-shirts that went out for free! Oops.

This was simple enough, we added a `/callback` endpoint, registered it with the
payment gateway, and they would fire updates at it a few seconds or minutes
after a payment attempt was made. We simply marked orders as pending in the mean

> time, made a order status page, and they would get an email later. We could have

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
time, made an order status page, and they would get an email later. We could have
```

Reviewer 3: I think this could be made a bit clearer, something like:
```
This was simple enough to fix, we added a `/callback` endpoint, registered it with the
payment gateway, and they would fire updates at it once the payment was confirmed. We simply marked orders as pending in the meantime and only marked them for dispatch (and sent emails to the customers) once we received the confirmation via web hooks. We could have...
```

added 30 second short polling on the status page if we cared, or just had the
page refresh, but it was midnight and the bartender had just opened the whiskey.

Web hooks are often thought of as a bit of a dark art, because they happen outside of the normal
request/response stuff that API developers are used to. It can be hard to see them happen,

> tricky to confirm they are sending what you think, and used to be tricky to document.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
tricky to confirm they are sending what you think, and they used to be tricky to document.
```

These days there are loads of awesome tools around to help. OpenAPI v3.0 added support for
https://swagger.io/docs/specification/callbacks/[Callbacks].

NOTE: It makes me sad that this is called callbacks when it should be called web
hooks, and it's on the swagger.io website when the specification has been renamed
to OpenAPI. Ahh well.

Tools to help with this stuff:

- https://pipedream.com/[PipeDream] - Formerly known as RequestBin, create an endpoint and register that as the callback URL, and see what traffic is coming in. Then maybe copy that to use in a test suite
- https://ngrok.com/[ngrok] - Create a tunnel to your locally running application and register your local app as the callback URL

> That ngrok example might have made you notice an issue with web hooks: you need

Reviewer 3: Which ngrok example?

Reviewer 3: Oh I see. 
```suggestion
That ngrok mention might have made you notice an issue with web hooks: you need
```

some sort of DNS or known IP address to fire the payload at. If the client is
written in PHP, Java, Node, Ruby, etc. and running behind a web server then
yeah, it will probably have one of those, but if the client is a JavaScript

> application running in the users browser then that isn't going to work.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
application running in the user's browser then that isn't going to work.
```

For that we need another approach, and that is... 🥁

=== WebSocket

WebSocket is a whole other protocol to HTTP, that operates over TCP directly.
Instead of a client asking the server over and over again, or making a blocking
connection to the web server, the client establishes a connection to the server,
and then the two parties can send messages back and forth in real-time, and the
server doesn't need to know the IP address of the client because the client

> initiated the connection. Cool!

Reviewer 2: well actually, it does know the IP address because they have a connection :-P
it is clear what you mean but still not quite correct :)

Author: It knows the public IP of the interface making the connection, so maybe the router or some shit, but it wont know the IP of the machine. Should I get into that?

Reviewer 2: Not really, but the point of this is still not clear (for me it is clear because I know how these work) I just think that it would be hard to understand for someone not familiar with it.

Above you say that we will not open a connection for too long to save valuable time on the webserver, instead we introduce callbacks/webhooks to solve that. Now we get to WebSockets, which does exactly what we wanted to avoid, opening a connection for quite some (probably very long) time :)

```diff
Instead of a client asking the server over and over again, or making a blocking
-connection to the web server, the client establishes a connection to the server,
+connection to the web server, the client establishes a connection to another server which runs a websocket daemon,
and then the two parties can send messages back and forth in real-time, and the
-server doesn't need to know the IP address of the client because the client
+server doesn't need to know the IP address for creating new connections when there is something to send, because the client
initiated the connection. Cool!
```

Author: Awesome points, you're totally right. I've addeda TODO for this to hit in the second draft.

[quote,Wikipedia,https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSocket]
----
Both protocols are located at layer 7 in the OSI model and depend on TCP at layer 4. Although
they are different, RFC 6455 states that WebSocket "is designed to work over
HTTP ports 80 and 443 as well as to support HTTP proxies and intermediaries"
thus making it compatible with the HTTP protocol. To achieve compatibility, the
WebSocket handshake uses the HTTP Upgrade header to change from the HTTP
protocol to the WebSocket protocol.
----

> Basically whatever client and server side code you are using will do the same

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Basically whatever client and server side code you are using, it will do the same
```

thing: the server provides a WebSocket URL to the client, and they connect, and
messages can then go either way. Just like HTTP has `http://` and `https://`,
there is `ws://` and `wss://`.

[source,javascript]
____
// Create WebSocket connection
const socket = new WebSocket('ws://localhost:8080/cakes/abc123');

// Connection opened
socket.addEventListener('open', function (event) {
    socket.send('Hello Server!');
});

// Listen for messages
socket.addEventListener('message', function (event) {
    console.log('update RE that cake ', event.data);
});
____

The fact that HTTP and WS are quite similar in many ways, and that they are

> compatible in general, make it really easy to add WebSocket's into your HTTP API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
compatible in general, makes it really easy to add WebSocket's into your HTTP API
```

by using a web server that has it built in. MDN maintain
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebSockets_API#Tools[a list of
WebSocket tools] for folks interested in giving it a try, including web servers
that support them.

You can punt figuring out how to run a WebSocket server entirely, but using
hosted solutions like https://pusher.com/[Pusher] and

> https://www.pubnub.com/websockets/[PubNub].

Reviewer 2: forgot to finish the sentence... "but using hosted solutions like ... " - is what?

Author: "by using..." 🤦‍♂️

=== Message Brokers & Job Queues

> One important component here is the server being able to "do stuff later",

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One important idea here is the server being able to "do stuff later",
```

> instead of the client twiddling their thumbs waiting for updates. How exactly do

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
without having the client twiddle their thumbs waiting for updates. How exactly do
```

we do that? Generally the idea is to push an event into a job queue, and then
some sort of worker process will pick up that message and "work on the job".

Sometimes this is done with tools based on AMQP or MQTT, two protocols designed
for "Message Brokering" in general. That is a whole topic by itself, and job
queues are just one of many possible use cases that message brokers can cover.
These tools run their own server which acts as a "broker", and they send the
messages off to "subscribers" who can get things done.

> A more simplistic approach for job queues it to use tooling like Sidekiq (a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A more simplistic approach for job queues is to use tooling like Sidekiq (a
```

popular Ruby tool for handling job queues), or the more recent polyglot version
Faktory. These sorts of solutions are popular because they just run off of Redis

> as the queue, and often run in the same codebase just on different threads. This

Reviewer 3: > and often run in the same codebase just on different threads
Not entirely sure what you mean here?

Author: Replaced with:

> These sorts of solutions are popular because they just run off of Redis
as the queue, and often run in the same codebase just on different threads.

> For example, in Rails you often have `app/workers` sat next to `app/controllers`
and all your other regular code, so you can use the same database connection
logic, hit the same libraries and dependencies, etc. This makes the setup a bit
less confusing for many.

Does that work?

makes the setup a bit less confusing for many.

Whatever message broker / job worker / do it later approach you use, you need to

> let  the client know that work is being done in the background. For a HTTP API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
let the client know that work is being done in the background. For a HTTP API
```
I have whitespace ocd :P 😂

this is usually done with a `201 Created`, or `202 Accepted` response code,
which also lets the client know they should look for some sort of link to get

> their updates.

Reviewer 3: Is the link given in the response body? Worth mentioning how you can get the link?

== Real World Examples

Alrighty, that was a lot of text, even for the Theory part of the book, so let's
get some visuals in here.

> Let's start accepting payments with a HTTP API, where a user is buying something

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's start accepting payments with a HTTP API, where a user is buying
```
something is already in the next line

> something from your website. Once they make a payment, and they want to know if

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
something from your website. Once they make a payment, they want to know if
```

it has been accepted or not, so they know if they are getting their hilarious
t-shirt.

.A completely synchronous approach to handling a payment from a GUI, with your API accepting the information and sending it off to an external API acting as a payment gateway.
[plantuml]
---------------------------------------------------------------------
@startuml

title Accepting Payments: Blocking the GUI and Synchronous

boundary "Web GUI" as GUI
control "API"
boundary "Payment Gateway" as PG

GUI -> API: POST /payments
API -> PG: POST /submitPaymentAttempt
PG -> PG: May take 30-60s to confirm
API <-- PG: HTTP 200 OK
GUI <-- API: HTTP 200 OK

@enduml
---------------------------------------------------------------------

If the world was a perfect place, this would be fine. All messages would somehow

> move faster than the speed of light, all servers would alway be responding

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
move faster than the speed of light, all servers would always be responding
```

perfectly, and no messages would be lost in transit, meaning the user gets a
nice, quick, consistent experience and the user interface does not leave them
guessing.

> Sadly none of this is true, but people seem to  design their data flows like it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sadly none of this is true, but people seem to design their data flows like it
```
I can't help it 🙈 😂

might be. The above flow will leave the user sat there twiddling their thumbs
for however long it takes that API gateway to respond.

There is one issue here that the user is twiddling their thumbs for 30 seconds,
but a bigger issue is that the API server is twiddling its thumbs for 30

> seconds. You realize that the payment gateway is too slow to use synchronous

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
seconds (rather than serving other requests). You realize that the payment gateway is too slow to use synchronous
```

> requests to talk to them, so lets shift that to a worker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
requests to talk to them, so let's shift that to a worker.
```

GUI -> API: Establish wss:// connection
Worker -> PG: POST /submitPaymentAttempt
PG -> PG: May take 30-60s to confirm
Worker <-- PG: HTTP 200 OK
Worker -> API: Update payment status
GUI <-- Worker: event triggered: payment being attempted now
GUI <-- Worker: event triggered: payment success

@enduml
----

Now the client is getting real time updates, and not just "is it done or not" but actual progress on various things happening. Also the background worker is able to talk directly to the client, instead of just updating the state in the API and hoping the client checks for a change.

Again this might be just fine, but the last remaining bottleneck is the interaction with this slow third party API. Even though the slowness is in the background worker, maybe the worker is backing up a bunch, due to high demand. During Black Friday this might mean your workers are so backed up they're taking 20 minutes to get to updating, because most of them are spending all the CPU cycles just waiting.

Maybe the company providing this payment gateway realized that 30-60 sync requests are daft, and implemented Web Hooks on their end. Let's update our approach to support that.

> .Removing the short polling from the client using a WebSocket.

Reviewer 3: Title leftover from the previous example?

Author: The title before it mentioned short polling, i think this is consistent.

[plantuml]
----
@startuml

title Accepting Payments: WebSocket and Job Queues

boundary "Web GUI" as GUI
control "API"
control Worker
boundary "Payment Gateway" as PG

GUI -> API: POST /payments
API -> Worker: Queue Job
GUI <-- API: HTTP 201 Created (with a wss:// URL)
GUI -> API: Establish wss:// connection
Worker -> PG: POST /submitPaymentAttempt
Worker <-- PG: HTTP 201 Created
GUI <- Worker: event triggered: waiting for response from payment gateway
PG -> PG: May take 30-60s to confirm
API <- PG: HTTP POST /callback
API -> GUI: event triggered: payment success

@enduml
----

Some notable differences here, mostly that the worker is just responsible for passing on the job to the payment gateway. Seeing as the API has registered a callback URL, the payment gateway can fire a HTTP POST payload right at our API, and the API can push the message into the WebSocket to update the client.

> Why would you still want to use a worker if the third-party payment gateway is doing things asynchronously itself? Well, if that third party gateway goes down, or is acting slowly, your API will also fail, or perform slowly. Chucking a background worker in there adds a bit of resilience to your system, especially as most background workers have automatic retry logic for failed jobs.

Reviewer 3: Like the examples and this last point is 👍 👍 👍
